The Project Gutenberg eBook of Dr. Montessori's Own Handbook

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of your country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Dr. Montessori's Own Handbook

Author: Maria Montessori

Release date: August 8, 2009 [eBook #29635]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Alicia Williams, Dan Horwood and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        book was produced from scanned images of public domain
        material from the Google Print project.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DR. MONTESSORI'S OWN HANDBOOK ***

Produced by Alicia Williams, Dan Horwood and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)

               DR. MONTESSORI'S
                 OWN HANDBOOK

                      BY

               MARIA MONTESSORI

    AUTHOR OF "THE MONTESSORI METHOD" AND
          "PEDAGOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY"

       _WITH FORTY-THREE ILLUSTRATIONS_

                   NEW YORK
         FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY
                  PUBLISHERS

            _Copyright, 1914, by_
         FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY

   _All rights reserved, including that of
     translation into foreign languages_

              TO MY DEAR FRIEND

             DONNA MARIA MARAINI
        MARCHIONESS GUERRIERI-GONZAGA

                     WHO
         DEVOTEDLY AND WITH SACRIFICE
            HAS GENEROUSLY UPHELD
  THIS WORK OF EDUCATION BROUGHT TO BIRTH IN
             OUR BELOVED COUNTRY
                 BUT OFFERED
         TO THE CHILDREN OF HUMANITY

NOTE BY THE AUTHOR

  As a result of the widespread interest that has been taken
  in my method of child education, certain books have been
  issued, which may appear to the general reader to be
  authoritative expositions of the Montessori system. I wish
  to state definitely that the present work, the English
  translation of which has been authorised and approved by
  me, is the only authentic manual of the Montessori method,
  and that the only other authentic or authorised works of
  mine in the English language are "The Montessori Method,"
  and "Pedagogical Anthropology."

                                  [Signed: Maria Montessori]

PREFACE

If a preface is a light which should serve to illumine the contents of
a volume, I choose, not words, but human figures to illustrate this
little book intended to enter families where children are growing up.
I therefore recall here, as an eloquent symbol, Helen Keller and Mrs.
Anne Sullivan Macy, who are, by their example, both teachers to
myself--and, before the world, living documents of the miracle in
education.

In fact, Helen Keller is a marvelous example of the phenomenon common
to all human beings: the possibility of the liberation of the
imprisoned spirit of man by the education of the senses. Here lies the
basis of the method of education of which the book gives a succinct
idea.

If one only of the senses sufficed to make of Helen Keller a woman of
exceptional culture and a writer, who better than she proves the
potency of that method of education which builds on the senses? If
Helen Keller attained through exquisite natural gifts to an elevated
conception of the world, who better than she proves that in the
inmost self of man lies the spirit ready to reveal itself?

Helen, clasp to your heart these little children, since they, above
all others, will understand you. They are your younger brothers: when,
with bandaged eyes and in silence, they touch with their little hands,
profound impressions rise in their consciousness, and they exclaim
with a new form of happiness: "I see with my hands." They alone, then,
can fully understand the drama of the mysterious privilege your soul
has known. When, in darkness and in silence, their spirit left free to
expand, their intellectual energy redoubled, they become able to read
and write without having learnt, almost as it were by intuition, they,
only they, can understand in part the ecstasy which God granted you on
the luminous path of learning.

MARIA MONTESSORI.

CONTENTS

                                                                  PAGE
 PREFACE                                                           vii
 INTRODUCTORY REMARKS                                                1
 A "CHILDREN'S HOUSE"                                                9
 THE METHOD                                                         17
     Didactic Material for the Education of the Senses              18
     Didactic Material for the Preparation of Writing
         and Arithmetic                                             19
 MOTOR EDUCATION                                                    20
 SENSORY EDUCATION                                                  29
 LANGUAGE AND KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD                                69
 FREEDOM                                                            77
 WRITING                                                            80
     Exercises for the Management of the Instrument of
         Writing                                                    86
     Exercises for the Writing of Alphabetical Signs                92
 THE READING OF MUSIC                                               98
 ARITHMETIC                                                        102
 MORAL FACTORS                                                     114

ILLUSTRATIONS

 Dr. Maria Montessori                                   _Frontispiece_

 FIG.                                                      FACING PAGE
  1.  Cupboard with Apparatus                                       12
  2.  The Montessori Pædometer                                      13
  3.  Frames for Lacing and Buttoning                               22
  4.  Child Buttoning On Frame                                      23
  5.  Cylinders Decreasing in Diameter only                         30
  6.  Cylinders Decreasing in Diameter and Height                   30
  7.  Cylinders Decreasing in Height only                           30
  8.  Child using Case of Cylinders                                 31
  9.  The Tower                                                     31
 10.  Child Playing with Tower                                      31
 11.  The Broad Stair                                               36
 12.  The Long Stair                                                36
 13.  Board with Rough and Smooth Surfaces                          37
 14.  Board with Gummed Strips of Paper                             37
 15.  Wood Tablets Differing in Weight                              47
      Color Spools                                                  42
 16.  Cabinet with Drawers to hold Geometrical Insets               44
 17.  Set of Six Circles                                            44
 18.  Set of Six Rectangles                                         45
 19.  Set of Six Triangles                                          45
 20.  Set of Six Polygons                                           46
 21.  Set of Six Irregular Figures                                  46
 22.  Set of Four Blanks and Two Irregular Figures                  47
 23.  Frame to hold Geometrical Insets                              48
 24.  Child Touching the Insets                                     49
 25.  Series of Cards with Geometrical Forms                        54
 26.  Sound Boxes                                                   55
 27.  Musical Bells                                                 60
 28.  Sloping Boards to Display Set of Metal Insets                 90
 29.  Single Sandpaper Letter                                       90
 30.  Groups of Sandpaper Letters                                   91
 31.  Box of Movable Letters                                        94
 32.  The Musical Staff                                             98
 33.  Didactic Material for Musical Reading                        100
 34.  Didactic Material for Musical Reading                        100
 35.  Didactic Material for Musical Reading                        100
 36.  Didactic Material for Musical Reading                        101
 37.  Didactic Material for Musical Reading                        101
 38.  Didactic Material for Musical Reading                        101
 39.  Dumb Keyboard                                                102
 40.  Diagram Illustrating Use of Numerical Rods                   107
 41.  Counting Boxes                                               110
 42.  Arithmetic Frame                                             110

DR. MONTESSORI'S OWN HANDBOOK

Recent years have seen a remarkable improvement in the conditions of
child life. In all civilized countries, but especially in England,
statistics show a decrease in infant mortality.

Related to this decrease in mortality a corresponding improvement is
to be seen in the physical development of children; they are
physically finer and more vigorous. It has been the diffusion, the
popularization of science, which has brought about such notable
advantages. Mothers have learned to welcome the dictates of modern
hygiene and to put them into practice in bringing up their children.
Many new social institutions have sprung up and have been perfected
with the object of assisting children and protecting them during the
period of physical growth.

In this way what is practically a new race is coming into being, a
race more highly developed, finer and more robust; a race which will
be capable of offering resistance to insidious disease.

What has science done to effect this? Science has suggested for us
certain very simple rules by which the child has been restored as
nearly as possible to conditions of a natural life, and an order and a
guiding law have been given to the functions of the body. For example,
it is science which suggested maternal feeding, the abolition of
swaddling clothes, baths, life in the open air, exercise, simple short
clothing, quiet and plenty of sleep. Rules were also laid down for the
measurement of food adapting it rationally to the physiological needs
of the child's life.

Yet with all this, science made no contribution that was entirely new.
Mothers had always nursed their children, children had always been
clothed, they had breathed and eaten before.

The point is, that the same physical acts which, performed blindly and
without order, led to disease and death, when ordered _rationally_
were the means of giving strength and life.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The great progress made may perhaps deceive us into thinking that
everything possible has been done for children.

We have only to weigh the matter carefully, however, to reflect: Are
our children only those healthy little bodies which to-day are growing
and developing so vigorously under our eyes? Is their destiny
fulfilled in the production of beautiful human bodies?

In that case there would be little difference between their lot and
that of the animals which we raise that we may have good meat or
beasts of burden.

Man's destiny is evidently other than this, and the care due to the
child covers a field wider than that which is considered by physical
hygiene. The mother who has given her child his bath and sent him in
his perambulator to the park has not fulfilled the mission of the
"mother of humanity." The hen which gathers her chickens together, and
the cat which licks her kittens and lavishes on them such tender care,
differ in no wise from the human mother in the services they render.

No, the human mother if reduced to such limits devotes herself in
vain, feels that a higher aspiration has been stifled within her. She
is yet the mother of man.

Children must grow not only in the body but in the spirit, and the
mother longs to follow the mysterious spiritual journey of the
beloved one who to-morrow will be the intelligent, divine creation,
man.

Science evidently has not finished its progress. On the contrary, it
has scarcely taken the first step in advance, for it has hitherto
stopped at the welfare of the body. It must continue, however, to
advance; on the same positive lines along which it has improved the
health and saved the physical life of the children, it is bound in the
future to benefit and to reenforce their inner life, which is the real
_human life_. On the same positive lines science will proceed to
direct the development of the intelligence, of character, and of those
latent creative forces which lie hidden in the marvelous embryo of
man's spirit.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As the child's body must draw nourishment and oxygen from its external
environment, in order to accomplish a great physiological work, the
_work of growth_, so also the spirit must take from its environment
the nourishment which it needs to develop according to its own "laws
of growth." It cannot be denied that the phenomena of development are
a great work in themselves. The consolidation of the bones, the
growth of the whole body, the completion of the minute construction of
the brain, the formation of the teeth, all these are very real labors
of the physiological organism, as is also the transformation which the
organism undergoes during the period of puberty.

These exertions are very different from those put forth by mankind in
so-called _external work_, that is to say, in "social production,"
whether in the schools where man is taught, or in the world where, by
the activity of his intelligence, he produces wealth and transforms
his environment.

It is none the less true, however, that they are both "work." In fact,
the organism during these periods of greatest physiological work is
least capable of performing external tasks, and sometimes the work of
growth is of such a character as to diminish notably the external
energies. This is clearly to be seen in the second period of growth,
at puberty. At this age the child is noted for certain characteristics
which might easily be mistaken for laziness: he is sleepy, inert, and
appears to be inactive and slow. Instead of all this being laziness,
it is a most intense internal work which absorbs the energies, since
nature has fixed all the forces of the organism in the great work of
the physiological transformation.

What conclusion must we draw from this?

The conclusion is this: that man's life must be considered, and
conducted, and helped, as a great work of nature, like the growth of
the world, the rising and setting of stars, like wind and rain; man
is a part of nature and his life is a natural phenomenon.

                  *       *       *       *       *

This conclusion opens to us a new way of understanding childhood, and
reveals to us children as human beings whose souls contain energies
which enable them to develop by means of their own efforts. These
energies are often of so marvelous a character as to call to our minds
the hidden germs enclosed in the body of the plant, which will
develop, by means of their own vital force, into the flower and the
fruit.

The child is truly a miraculous being, and this should be felt deeply
by the educator.

But let us proceed to another order of considerations.

The woman who is about to become a mother should have a higher
education--not the ordinary superficial instruction in woman's "
accomplishments," but a really deep culture, which will make her
thoughtful, and fit her to understand and follow the natural
phenomena of child's development. The mothers of our children are
today too superficial and too frivolous; it is they above all who
would be able really to help the natural development of the child if
they understood its requirements.

Education is a natural process carried out by the human individual,
and is acquired not by listening to words, but by experiences in the
environment.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A "CHILDREN'S HOUSE"

The "Children's House" is the environment which is offered to the
child that he may be given the opportunity of developing his
activities. This kind of school is not of a fixed type, but may vary
according to the financial resources at disposal and to the
opportunities afforded by the environment. It ought to be a real
house; that is to say, a set of rooms with a garden of which the
children are the masters. A garden which contains sheltered trees
and flowering plants cared for by the children.

In this way the children live in a small world that is theirs, where
they meet with obstacles and overcome them, where they enjoy real
triumph and experience real failure, where they are happy through
their own efforts and because they have done their duty and fulfilled
their aim.

The central and principal room of the building, often also the only
room at the disposal of the children, is the room for "intellectual
work." The walls are decorated with simple pictures, which are
changed from time to time as circumstances suggest. The only
essential furniture of this room are little tables; some square and
rather large, others small and oval, and little chairs.

The pictures, the vases for flowers, all the gay and pleasant
furnishings, are at the height of the children, within easy reach of
their little hands.

Around the room low cupboards, which the children can easily reach,
contain the didactic material with which they work.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Cupboard with Apparatus.]

The didactic material for the education of the senses consists of:

   _The tower of cubes._

Ten cubes the edges of which vary by one centimetre.
(1 centimetre, 2 centimetres, 3 centimetres, etc.)

   _Three sets of solid insets._

   _The long stair._

Ten prisms, varying from one centimetre square to ten centimetres
square in section, all of the same length (20 centimetres).

   _The broad stair._

Ten prisms of the same height and length, but of decreasing breadth.

   _The didactic material for the chromatic sense._

   _The cabinet for the geometrical insets._

   _The series of cards upon which geometrical forms are drawn._

   _The collection of fabrics._

   _The set of tablets for testing the thermic sense._

   _The set of tablets for testing the baric sense._

   _The collection of little boxes containing substances to test the
   olfactory sense._

   _The collection of little boxes containing substances to test the
   gustatory sense._

   _The double series of musical bells._

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--The Montessori Pædometer.]

In addition to this material, others may be added according to the
opportunities and the means at disposal, such as a collection of
stuffs and of coloured silks.

The didactic material for the preparation of intellectual activity
consists of:

   _Solid insets in the geometric forms._

   _Frames, in which are set pieces of cloth to be buttoned, laced,
   hooked, etc._

   _Small wooden tablets upon which are pasted sandpaper letters._

   _A box containing wooden letters._

   _A series of cards upon which single words are printed._

   _A series of cards upon which sentences are printed._

   _A series of cards upon which little stories are printed._

Besides these there are a series of wooden tablets with the numbers on
them, and a quantity of little sticks for counting.

The teacher observes the children, and when she perceives that one of
them shows an interest in some object, she approaches, sits down beside
him, and gives him the lesson corresponding to the object which has
attracted his attention.

For example, the teacher sees that a child is attracted by the cubes.
She then seats herself by his side and puts the cubes on the table.

"This," she says, taking the largest cube, "is large."

"This," she says, taking the smallest, "is small."

She then places the large cube in the child's right hand, and the
small one in his left hand, and slowly repeats: "Large... small,
large... small, large... small," etc.

She asks the child: "Which is large?" and "Which is small?"

If the child makes an error she does not insist; she smiles and puts
the material in order, saying: "I see you like this work. You may play
with it as long as you like."

If, however, the child has responded well to the lesson, she proceeds
to the second lesson.

She takes three cubes, one large, one small, and one intermediate, and
teaches the child the word for the intermediate size:

"This is large, this is small, this is medium."

And then: "Show me the large one, show me the small one, show me the
medium one."

When the child responds readily to this lesson, she proceeds to the
third.

She places all the cubes upon the table in no particular order, and says
to the child: "Now build a tower; put the largest cube at the bottom
and the smallest at the top."

The child builds the tower.

In this lesson with the cubes, which is repeated in the same way with
all the didactic material, the child learns:

1. To distinguish between large and small.

2. To discriminate between gradations of the same quality.

3. To use his reason.

4. A number of words.

When the child has completed an exercise he restores all of the
material to the cupboard, each piece in its own place; and this may be
considered as a lesson in setting things in order.

The education of the movements is very complex, as it has to correspond
to all the movements which the children have to learn to make. In my
book, "The Montessori Method," I have described the exercises on the
line for the education of equilibrium, and a number of exercises for
the education of the hands and fingers.

Here I shall limit myself to mentioning the exercises that can be done
with the frames mentioned above, as they are very popular with the
children.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Frames for Lacing and Buttoning.]

These exercises for the education of the movements are very important,
and they correspond to the need which the children feel to learn how
to dress themselves and to perform many actions of everyday life.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Child Buttoning On Frame.]

The exercises are the following:

   _To learn to button clothes._

The frame carries pieces of cloth which can be buttoned together. The
buttons are large, and everything is constructed in such a way as to
offer points of interest and also of difficulty to be overcome, but all
in relation to the particular capacity for development possessed by
children from three to six years of age.

   _To learn to tie bows._

   _To learn to lace._

   _To learn to buckle._

   _To learn to hook and eye._

These last obstacles, like the first, are all mounted upon square wooden
frames of the same size, so that they can be placed upon little tables
or can be hung upon little hooks against the wall.

The children choose freely which they will use, and change from one to
the other as often as they wish.

When the child knows how to button, lace, tie bows, etc., he applies
this knowledge every day to the dressing and undressing of himself,
and so he gradually becomes independent of the help of others in the
ordinary acts of life. And in learning to dress himself, he is
preparing for that far more complex form of independence which consists
in being able to choose his own way in life.

This is the point of view from which all these exercises should be
considered. They are, furthermore, the first steps in what I have
called the education of the movements.

Now, just as the education which tends to fit the body for life ought
to be commenced from birth (as, for example, in the case of
nourishment, clothing, and the care of the skin), so also the
education of the movements ought to be begun at a very early period.

For the movements are the means by which the intelligence comes into
contact with its environment and establishes itself in relation to it.

If a parallel be drawn between the function of movement in the child
and in the adult, it will be found that in the adult the movements
serve the intelligence, whereas in the child the movements serve to
create the intelligence.

In fact, it is largely by means of movement that the child explores
his environment, and so forms for himself a knowledge of his
surroundings. It is by touching objects, by reaching towards them and
taking hold of them, that the child comes to know them and to
understand the world about him.

Ability to move is therefore essential to the education of childhood.

Hence the little child should be free to move about and to handle
things as he has need, and the education of his movements should be
carefully provided for as one of the principal elements in the
formation of his intelligence.

                  *       *       *       *       *

MOTOR EDUCATION

The education of the movements is of great importance, and presents
difficulties and complexities which are not met with in the education
of the senses.

In the education of the senses there exists a control of error--that
is to say, the child working with the didactic material will himself
perceive if he makes a mistake. If, for example, with the solid insets
he has placed a large cylinder in the cavity meant for a small one, he
will see that it will not go down, and if he has placed the little
cylinder in a large cavity he will see that it rattles about
irregularly when touched. In the same way, with the cubes of the tower,
if he places a large cube upon a small one, or if he leaves out one of
the intermediate cubes, he will no longer be able to build a regular
diminishing tower, and the irregularity will strike his eye. In most
of the material for the education of the senses the errors become
evident through the automatic control of the material itself.

But in the education of the movements it is far more difficult to
establish such a control. How can the child know if the movement which
he makes in walking is or is not the most perfect one possible? How
can he tell if he gets up from his chair and sits down again in the
most composed and graceful manner possible?

The control of the muscular movements is one of the conquests to be
made by the child. But while he is making this conquest the child will
find great pleasure in the acquisition, and will of his own accord
repeat an infinite number of times the movements whose mechanism he is
establishing.

The aim of education is not perfection, but it is to put the child in
communication with his environment in such a way that the child finds
satisfaction and happiness in his work.

If the aim of physical education is to perfect the body as a
magnificent instrument of the spirit, this does not mean that every
child must become a gymnast. It means that his body shall be so
developed and so trained that it shall be able at any moment to be the
perfect vehicle for the expression of the individual spirit and
intelligence which he possesses.

In the same way, if one of the aims of education is to develop the
movements, this does not mean that the children must all move in
exactly the same manner. On the contrary, the movements should be
developed in the most natural manner for each individual child, so
that his personality shall be enabled to express itself through
movements which are truly his own.

For that matter, if we watch children of the same age, we shall
observe great individual differences in their movements, and it is
these differences which should be fostered and developed.

The fundamental principle in the education of movement is that the
child should be free. The movements should never be repressed, and the
child should never be forced to make movements.

The education of the movements should be, like all education,
"auto-education."

The child should be helped to move, but he should not be made to move.

One of the most important things in the education of movement is to
offer to the child the means for exercising his activities.

For example, if a child shows a desire to walk, he should be given the
opportunity to walk. If he shows a desire to carry things, he should
be provided with things to carry which are suited to his strength.

If he shows an interest in the care of his person--in washing himself,
in brushing his hair, in cleaning his nails, etc., he should be
provided with the means for satisfying these desires, and with
objects proportioned to his size and his strength.

For the care of the person there should be provided washstands of the
height suitable for the children, with little pitchers and basins,
soap, nail-brushes, tooth-brushes, etc.

The furniture throughout should be light, so that the children can
move it easily; and it should be low, so that they can dust it and
take care of it themselves.

In "The Montessori Method" I have described a large number of
exercises, some of which are taken from the common actions of everyday
life, such as the laying and clearing of tables, the washing of
crockery, etc., and others which are specially designed for the
development of muscular control, such as the exercises on the line.

All such exercises should be performed by the children spontaneously
and with enjoyment.

One important particular in connection with these exercises is that
the children should perform them in the most perfect manner possible.
Not perfect in any absolute sense, but perfect according to their
individual capacity for the time being.

In other words, the children should put the greatest possible amount
of attention and care into whatever they do, so that they shall
succeed in really _controlling their movements._

It is for this reason that a number of actions of everyday life are
"analyzed," that is to say, they are divided up into a series of
simple movements, and the children are taught to carry out, one by one
and with great care, these elementary movements of which the
complete action is composed.

For example, the laying of the table becomes a series of deliberate
and separate acts: the child first fetches the little mats and sets
one in each place where a person is to sit; then he fetches the plates
and sets one on each mat; then the glasses; then the knives; then the
forks; then the spoons; then the napkins.

At each journey he carries only one object (or one set of similar
objects), and sets it in its place with care and attention.

In this way the child is concentrating his whole attention upon the
perfect control of his own movements.

Or, to take another example: in dusting a table, the child's attention
is directed first to the holding of the duster, then to the light but
thorough spreading of the dust-cloth over the surface, then to the
movements from left to right by which the dust is removed, and,
finally, to the folding and putting away of the duster.

By such exercises the child becomes master of his movements and
acquires a muscular control which he could not gain in any other way.

This is a considerable help to the child in all the other activities
of his life. Through the carrying out of actions of practical life
the child learns to move well, and so he is better prepared for those
physical exercises which have no practical aim, but which help to
perfect his bodily development.

But there is another very important side to this education through
practical life, and it is this: the child, by taking part in the work
going on about him, becomes a real member of the social community.

He is no longer a useless little being, incapable of performing any
service and always in need of care, but he becomes capable of helping
others and of fulfilling a useful function in the environment. And he
gains enormously in self-respect, in independence, and in that
understanding of life which comes to those who are in actual contact
with real things.

This point of view opens an almost unlimited field of activity for the
child, since all the actions of life may become means of education.

Care of the person, care of animals, care of plants and flowers, and
the general care of the immediate environment, may all become sources
of activity and learning.

If to this we add the fact that the child takes intense pleasure in
these activities, and that through them he is put into communication
with all the most interesting things of his environment, it will be
understood that we have here one of the most important sides of the
education of little children.

The education of the senses and the education of movement have as their
foundation the satisfaction of the child's need for activity. They are
founded upon the principle that the child develops through the
exercise of his faculties and through experience.

But, in order that this exercise may truly educate, it is necessary
that it should be carried out according to certain principles.

In the first place, it is necessary that the child shall perform the
exercises by himself and of his own free will.

Secondly, the material upon which the child works should be
scientifically organized with a definite educative aim.

A haphazard collection of objects will not serve this purpose. The
material should be graded, so that there shall be a series of
experiences, each one of which is slightly more difficult than the one
which went before.

Thirdly, there should be freedom of choice. The child should be free
to choose for himself the occupations which interest him, and he should
be allowed to continue an occupation for as long as it continues to
interest him.

As the child cannot be considered educatively as an isolated being,
but must be thought of in his relation to the social environment, it
is necessary to provide also for the development of social life.

For this reason the "Children's House" should contain children of
various ages. In every family there are little children and older
children, and it is the relationship between children of different
ages which stimulates development and contributes to the education of
social feeling.

Moreover, the care of the little children on the part of the older
ones develops a feeling of responsibility and affords many
opportunities for the growth of moral sentiments.

The development of social life is also favoured if the children are
allowed to work together and to help one another.

Two children may work together at the same exercise, or one child may
help another to carry on an exercise which proves too difficult for
him when working alone.

Such cooperation among the children is not forced, but, when it
occurs spontaneously, it is permitted and encouraged.

Moreover, the children should be allowed to communicate freely among
themselves. They should not be unnecessarily restricted in their
conversation, but should be allowed to exchange ideas, to share their
observations, and to ask for explanations.

By such means the social instincts are developed, and the children
learn to live in harmony with their companions.

It is evident that in such a community of little ones there must be
rules of social life, but these rules should be limited to what is
necessary for the maintenance of order, and for teaching the child
habits of grace and courtesy which will help him in his social
relationships.

For example, a child should be taught to say "Excuse me" when he
passes in front of another person, to say "Thank you" when any service
is performed for him, and so forth.

Such rules of courtesy, if they are taught at the right time and in
the right way, are very easily learned by little children, and will
be of service to them all their lives.

But rules should never be multiplied beyond what is necessary, and the
freedom of the child should never be restricted unless such
restriction is required either for the child's own welfare or for the
welfare of the community.

If such principles as these are followed, it will be found that little
children are capable of developing a considerable amount of social
feeling, and that they can live together in harmony in a way which is
often very surprising to those who have thought of childhood as
necessarily a period of unlimited egoism.

Through such community life the children learn to be members of a
society, and they develop those social sentiments which will be of the
utmost importance to them throughout their lives.

                  *       *       *       *       *

SENSORY EDUCATION

The education of the senses has, as its aim, the refinement of the
differential perception of stimuli by means of repeated exercises.

There is no more difficult question in experimental psychology than
that of determining to what extent the education of the senses is
possible.

The researches of the experimental psychologists (Fechner, Weber,
etc.) have given us very exact information as to the minimum
perceptible differences in the matter of weight, color, sound, etc.
That is to say, they have determined how slight a difference in weight
the tactile-muscular sense can distinguish; how slight a difference in
color the chromatic sense will respond to; what is the smallest
difference in the length of two lines which the eye can detect, etc.

But the opinion of to-day is that the capacity of perceiving these
minimum differences is fixed and cannot be educated.

Certainly, no one would expect that an individual whose ear is only
capable of distinguishing sounds separated by a tone could educate his
ear so far as to distinguish quarter-tones.

But, while the sensory capacity as limited by the individual structure
cannot be exceeded, it is nevertheless true that the senses, left to
themselves, do not attain the maximum development of which they are
capable.

For example, it is certain that most people do not know how to use
their eyes to observe; they do not know how to use their ears to hear
sounds and noises; they do not know how to use the sense of touch to
recognize objects.

An experimental proof of this is to be found in the well-known fact
that if an adult who has been born blind recovers his sight through
an operation, he is not able immediately to distinguish by sight
between such things as a cube and a sphere, which he has always
distinguished easily by touch, but he must learn to see them. This
proves that the eye is not perfectly educated merely because the
visual sense is developed.

The same truth can be observed in regard to the muscular sense. For
example, a person who is beginning to learn to write cannot control
his muscular movements sufficiently to make regular letters. His
muscular sense in regard to the pen is not educated, although he has
long had the ability to control the greater number of his muscular
movements and to use his hands for many purposes.

The fact is that each set of stimuli, even though it involve the same
sense, demands its own special education.

It is necessary to educate the eye to see minute differences of form;
it is necessary to educate the sense of touch to perceive through the
finger-tips the roughness and smoothness of surfaces; and it is
necessary to educate the auditory perception to recognize sounds and
noises.

This education of the senses is not only possible, but it is also
necessary.

And the time to begin this education is in the period of childhood,
when the nervous system is still in process of development.

In my schools the education of the senses has always given most
satisfactory results. The children acquire a fineness of perception
which is often surprising.

For example, many of the children, by touching the tablets which I use
for the education of the tactile sense, can distinguish differences
which the untrained adult cannot perceive.

This education of the senses, then, is not only possible, but it is
the foundation of all the higher education of the child.

It is upon the accuracy of perception that the accuracy of judgment
depends.

If the child does not learn to observe, and to see the minute
differences and the delicate similarities which exist between objects,
how will he ever become capable of making those fine distinctions
which are necessary to the classification of things according to their
qualities?

And if he is not capable of making accurate distinctions, how will his
mind ever become systematized and logical?

The education of the senses, therefore, is the preparation for
intellectual education, and the careful and systematic education of
the senses thus becomes one of the most important phases of education.

The didactic material by means of which this education is carried out
consists, as I have said, of objects so made that each series contains
pieces which are exactly alike except in respect to the one quality
which it is desired to bring to the child's consciousness.

For example, the cubes of the "tower" are all exactly alike except in
respect to size; they are all pink in color, all made of the same
wood, and all have the same degree of smoothness, weight, etc. The
only difference between them is the difference in size.

In the same way, the tablets for the education of the chromatic sense
are all exactly alike except in respect to color. They are identical
in size, in shape, in the quality of the surface, in weight, in
material, etc.

By means of such material the child's attention is concentrated upon
the one quality which differentiates the objects, and his
consciousness of that particular quality is greatly intensified.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Cylinders Decreasing in Diameter only.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Cylinders Decreasing in Diameter and Height.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Cylinders Decreasing in Height only.]

Moreover, the fact that the differences are scientifically graded and
proceed by regular steps makes it possible for the child to educate
his powers of distinction in a systematic way.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Child using Case of Cylinders.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--The Tower.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--Child Playing with Tower.]

The child begins by learning to distinguish between stimuli which are
very different, and, as his power of distinction develops, he becomes
able to distinguish between objects in which the difference is slight.

In this way the power of observation is cultivated and refined.

The didactic material is limited in quantity, and the child is given
only what he can use to advantage.

There is never any confusion of objects, never any overwhelming of the
child with more material than he can master.

Each piece of the material has its own special place, and the child
knows where to find it and where to put it away when his work is done.

In this way habits of order are formed, and the child learns to be
systematic in his use of material.

I will now describe briefly the principal pieces of material used for
the education of the various senses.

_The Visual Sense._

The education of the visual sense is of the greatest importance, since
a large proportion of all our knowledge of the external world comes to
us through the medium of sight.

There are several different aspects of visual education, and for each
aspect I have prepared special didactic material.

_Dimension._ The material for the education of the visual sense with
regard to dimension consists of three sets of objects:

1. The tower of cubes.

2. The broad stair.

3. The long stair.

These objects have already been mentioned. The cubes of the tower are
ten in number, and they are colored pink. The smallest cube has an
edge of one centimetre, and each of the others has an edge one
centimetre greater than the preceding, so that the largest cube has an
edge of ten centimetres.

The child builds the cubes up into a tower, placing the largest at the
bottom and the others in order, each upon the one next in size, with
the smallest at the top.

The broad stair consists of ten prisms, colored brown. They are all of
the same length (twenty centimetres), but they differ in their other
dimensions. The thickest prism is ten centimetres high and ten
centimetres broad. The others diminish in thickness, but not in
length, so that the thinnest prism is ten centimetres long and one
centimetre square in section.

These prisms can be arranged like the steps of a stair, with the
thickest forming the bottom step.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.--The Broad Stair.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--The Long Stair.]

The long stair consists of ten rods colored red. These rods are all one
centimetre square in section, but they differ in length. The shortest
rod is one decimetre long, and each of the others is one decimetre
longer than the preceding, so that the longest rod is one metre in
length.

The rods are arranged in order of length, so as to form an uneven
figure like a stair.

The use of this three-fold material gives the child a clear
comprehension of the three dimensions of space.

_Form._ The education of the sense of form is accomplished by means of
the following material:

1. Three series of solid insets.

2. A cabinet containing the plane geometric insets.

The three series of solid insets consist of three blocks of wood, each
of which is provided with ten holes, and ten cylinders which fit
exactly into the holes.

In the first block all the cylinders are the same height, but they
differ in diameter.

In the second block the cylinders differ both in height and in
diameter, in such a way that the cylinder which has the largest
diameter is also the highest, and the cylinder which has the smallest
diameter is also the lowest.

In the third block all the cylinders have the same diameter, but they
differ in height.

The child takes the cylinders out of the holes and then seeks to put
them back, each one in its right place.

It is evident that there is a control of error, since the cylinders
can be put into their right holes only.

The second part of the material for the education of the sense of form
is the cabinet of plane geometric insets.

This consists of a little cupboard containing six drawers. In the
drawers are six series of plane geometric figures.

Each figure is mounted upon a little square board, and is provided
with a little button by means of which it can be taken hold of and
removed from its frame.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--Board with Rough and Smooth Surfaces.]

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--Board with Gummed Strips of Paper.]

The six series are the following:

I. Six circles, differing in diameter.

II. Six rectangles, differing in length and breadth.

III. Six triangles of different forms and sizes.

IV. Six polygons (pentagon, hexagon, heptagon, octagon, enneagon,
decagon).

V. Six irregular curvilinear figures, all different.

VI. Two figures identical in form with two of the preceding, and four
blanks (i.e., frames with no insets).

By the use of this material the child learns to recognize the
differences of geometric form.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--Wood Tablets Differing in Weight.]

[Illustration: Color Spools.]

_Color._ The education of the chromatic sense is provided for by
material consisting of two series of tablets.

In the first series there are eight pairs of color tablets. The colors
are the fundamental colors and some intermediate tints: red, blue,
yellow, green, orange, violet, brown, black.

Each color is represented by two tablets exactly alike, and the child's
exercise consists in grouping the tablets in pairs, matching each
tablet with its fellow.

This exercise is often done blindfold, the child depending upon his
memory of colors.

The second series consists of eight boxes, each one containing a number
of gradations of one particular color.

For example, there is one box containing seven different tints of red,
passing from the lightest pink to the deepest red.

Another box contains seven gradations of blue; another, seven
gradations of green; and so on.

The child's exercise with this material consists in arranging the
different shades of each color in gradation.

As the child becomes skilled in this exercise, the gradations may be
mixed, and he may be asked to sort out the different shades and
arrange them in order.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--Cabinet with Drawers to hold Geometrical
Insets.]

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--Set of Six Circles.]

All this work with colors gives a remarkable education of the
chromatic sense, and it often happens that children who have worked
with this material become capable of distinguishing shades of
difference in colors which are indistinguishable to the ordinary adult
eye.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--Set of Six Rectangles.]

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--Set of Six Triangles.]

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--Set of Six Polygons.]

[Illustration: FIG. 21.--Set of Six Irregular Figures.]

_The Tactile Sense._

For the education of the tactile sense I make use of:

1. Surfaces of different degrees of roughness.

2. Fabrics of different quality and texture.

3. Tablets of different temperatures.

4. Tablets of different weights.

The surfaces consist of rectangular pieces of wood, cardboard, or
glass, upon which are pasted or fastened materials having different
degrees of roughness and smoothness.

For example, there may be a series consisting of very smooth glass,
cardboard, fine sandpaper, coarse sandpaper, and very coarse
sandpaper.

Or there may be a piece of polished wood placed next to a piece of the
finest sandpaper; then, again, two other pieces offering a less marked
contrast; and so on.

The exercise consists in feeling these surfaces and appreciating their
differences and gradations in smoothness and roughness.

A good exercise for sensitizing the finger-tips is to have the child,
while blindfolded, feel surfaces and put together those that are
alike.

The fabrics consist of small pieces of various textures: velvet, satin,
silk, cotton, linen, canvas, etc.

The exercise consists in feeling the fabrics while blindfolded and in
grouping together those pieces which are of the same quality.

For the education of the thermic sense I use a set of tablets made of
different materials: metal, wood, glass, woolen cloth, cotton cloth,
sandpaper, etc.

When these tablets, all of the same size and thickness, are placed
upon the table for a few moments, they take on the temperature of the
surrounding air, but, because of the different conductivity of the
various materials, they feel warmer or cooler to the touch.

The exercise consists in distinguishing between the tablets and in
grouping together those which give the same sensation of temperature.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.--Set of Four Blanks and Two Irregular Figures.]

[Illustration: FIG. 23.--Frame to hold Geometrical Insets.]

[Illustration: FIG. 24.--Child Touching the Insets.]

The series of tablets for the education of the baric sense consists of
small tablets of different woods. The tablets are all of the same
size, but, because of the differences in the specific weight of the
woods, they differ notably in weight.

The exercise consists in taking the tablets in the hand (or better,
placing them upon the palm and lifting them slightly upon the extended
hand) and distinguishing the differences in weight.

At first the child learns to distinguish only between heavy and light,
taking into his two hands the two tablets which offer the greatest
contrast.

Later, he learns to distinguish slight differences, and, finally, to
arrange all the tablets in order from the heaviest to the lightest.

The exercises with these various materials constitute a real education
of the several tactile senses, and render the child's hand intelligent
and ready to appreciate those tactile impressions which will be of
such assistance to him when he undertakes the exercises preparatory to
writing.

_The Auditory Sense._

For the education of the auditory sense I use two series of bells and
also a set of cylinders, closed and filled with various materials.

The first series of bells consists of one set arranged upon a stand in
the manner of a keyboard. These bells are tuned according to the
diatonic scale of C major.

The child strikes these bells with a little hammer, and learns to
distinguish the differences in pitch and to recognize the tones of the
scale.

The second series consists of eight pairs of bells, like the first
series, but not arranged upon a stand. Of each pair, one bell has a
white support and one has a brown support, but the two bells of each
pair give exactly the same tone.

The exercise consists in taking one of the bells with brown support,
sounding it, and then searching among the bells with white supports
for the bell which gives the same tone.

[Illustration: FIG. 25.--Series of Cards with Geometrical Forms.]

[Illustration: FIG. 26.--Sound Boxes.]

In this way the child learns to recognize identity and difference in
musical tones, and his sense of pitch is greatly refined.

The exercise may be made more difficult by increasing the number of
the bells, and so making smaller the intervals between the sounds.

The series of cylinders for sound consists of six pairs of cylinders.
All the cylinders are alike externally, but each pair contains a
different material--such as salt, rice, peas, etc.--and gives a
different sound when shaken.

The exercise is similar to that with the musical bells. The child
takes one cylinder, listens to the sound which it makes when shaken,
and then searches among the cylinders for the one which makes a sound
exactly like it.

A development of this exercise consists in arranging the cylinders in a
series according to the intensity of sound, from the softest to the
loudest.

_The Olfactory Sense._

The education of the sense of smell is provided for by a double series
of small boxes or bottles containing different odoriferous substances.

The exercise consists in smelling the contents of one box, and then
searching among the others for the box which contains the same odor.

_The Gustatory Sense._

For the education of taste there is a double series of little bottles
containing solutions of the four fundamental tastes: sweet, bitter,
acid, and salty.

The exercise consists in tasting the contents of one bottle and then
finding, among the others, the bottle which contains the same taste.

_Conclusions._

The education of the senses, conducted by means of the didactic
materials which I have described, leads to many very important
results.

In the first place, the child's powers of observation are notably
increased and refined.

The child who has been educated by this method observes his
environment with an attention and an accuracy which are surprising.
He notices details which escape the observation of others, and he
groups his observations in a logical and intelligent manner.

Secondly, the child acquires a real aesthetic sense. The training in
the recognition of form, color, musical pitch, etc., leads to a
genuine appreciation of beautiful things, and the child shows pleasure
in harmonious surroundings and displeasure when harmony is lacking.

Thirdly, the education of the hand, through the tactile exercises,
prepares for all those abilities which depend upon the skillful use of
the hand.

And, finally, the education of the senses forms a sound foundation for
intellectual development.

The child learns to observe, to compare, to judge. His mind acquires
exactness, his intelligence becomes acute and ready. And when, later,
he undertakes the abstract study of number, of reading, of writing,
etc., he brings to these studies faculties which have been well
trained and developed, and his progress is much more rapid and much
more intelligent than would otherwise be possible.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FIG. 27.--Musical Bells.]

LANGUAGE AND KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD

While the child is developing his senses, and through them his powers
of observation and his intelligence, he is also extending his
knowledge of the world about him and adding to his vocabulary.

The nomenclature relating to the sense exercises is taught in the
manner I have already described.

That is to say, the teacher gives the child the names of the
different qualities which he is learning to distinguish. She teaches
him "rough" and "smooth" when he is working with the tactile tablets;
"long" and "short" when he is arranging the rods; "light" and "dark"
when he is working with the color tablets; "loud" and "soft" when he
is comparing sounds; etc.

But a great deal of other information is also given to the child, both
through the lessons of the teacher and through his own spontaneous
activity.

The teacher talks to the children as opportunity offers, teaching them
the names of the objects in their environment, explaining their uses,
giving them information which interests them, and leading them to make
their own investigations and discoveries.

For example, while the children are working in the garden, the teacher
tells them the names of the flowers, of the vegetables, of the
implements used; she explains how plants grow, how they must be cared
for, how some plants are useful to man, etc.

While the children are engaged in the care of animals (rabbits,
chickens, etc.), she gives them information about the habits of these
animals, their uses, the care they require, etc.

If a child shows an interest in any particular subject, the teacher
follows up this interest, giving more detailed information and helping
the child to observe intelligently and to understand what he observes.

In this way the child acquires a great deal of information about the
world in which he lives.

He learns the names and uses of the objects in his immediate
environment. He learns about the materials of which things are made
and about the processes by which they are manufactured. He learns
about plants and animals and their life. He learns about the earth,
the sky, the weather, etc.

All this information is acquired not through tedious lessons which
mean little to the child, but in response to his own interest and as
an explanation of the things which he observes in his daily
experience.

The result is that the child really assimilates what he learns. It
becomes a part of his mental equipment, and forms a basis for further
learning and development.

In most schools, children are expected to learn a great many facts
which have no connection with their own experience and which,
therefore, mean very little to them.

Such learning is necessarily superficial and temporary. The child may
repeat the facts for the purpose of passing an examination, but he
does not assimilate them, and they do not become a real part of his
mental equipment.

The method of teaching facts through the child's own experience and in
response to his own interest ensures that the learning shall be real
and permanent.

                  *       *       *       *       *

FREEDOM

The principal agent in the child's development is the child himself.
But in order that the child may be able to develop in the most natural
way, he must be given freedom--freedom to act, to move, to express
himself, to carry out his spontaneous activities.

Most educators have a mistaken notion of what freedom in education
means. They think that if the child is to be free he must be allowed
to do anything he pleases, and that the teacher must never interfere
with him or place any restriction upon him.

Such a conception of freedom would lead to license, and license is
always harmful to the child.

The true freedom which the child should have is freedom to develop his
own activities, but along the lines of social development. That is to
say, the child should be free to do anything which is useful either to
himself or to the community, but he should not be allowed to do
anything which is useless or harmful.

For example, the child should be free to move about, to choose his own
occupations, to carry out his work in his own way and at his own pace.

But he should not be free to disturb other children who are at work,
to handle the materials carelessly so as to damage them, or to waste
time in idle and purposeless activity.

In my schools I have found that children, if they are given the right
kind of freedom, show a spontaneous disposition toward discipline and
order.

When the children have once become interested in some form of work,
and when they realize that this work is helping them to grow and to
develop, they show the greatest care in carrying out the work properly
and the greatest respect for the materials which they use.

The freedom and the discipline do not stand in opposition to each
other. On the contrary, discipline is the result of freedom.

When the child is free to choose work which interests him, and when he
is free to carry out this work in his own way, he develops powers of
concentration, habits of order, and respect for the rights of others.

The discipline which results from this freedom is not imposed from
without; it springs from within the child himself, and is therefore
far more genuine and far more valuable than any discipline which could
be imposed by force.

                  *       *       *       *       *

WRITING

The exercises for the senses are followed by the exercises which
prepare directly for instruction in the elementary school subjects.

And here I must explain that the instruction in reading, writing, and
arithmetic is not given because these subjects are thought to be
necessary parts of the education of children between the ages of three
and six years.

On the contrary, the instruction in these subjects is given simply
because the children show a spontaneous interest in the written and
printed symbols which they see about them, and because, when the
interest is present, the children learn these subjects with an ease
and rapidity which is impossible at a later period.

The child of four or five years is in a sensitive period for the
acquisition of written language. If this sensitivity is utilized, the
child learns to read and write almost without effort, and with a
degree of perfection which is surprising.

If, on the other hand, the teaching of reading and writing is
postponed until the child is six or seven years old, the task becomes
much more difficult, both for the child and for the teacher.

The method by which writing is taught consists of a series of exercises
which prepare the hand for the formation of the letters and the mind
for their recognition.

The preparation of the hand is accomplished through all the sense
exercises which I have described, and especially through the exercises
in which the child handles the geometric insets and learns to follow
their outlines with his finger.

The direct preparation for writing consists of exercises with
materials especially designed for this purpose.

The materials for the preparation of writing consist of:

1. Metal insets.

2. Cards upon which sandpaper letters are mounted.

3. A large box containing movable letters.

4. Simple reading cards.

The metal insets consist of a series of geometric figures--square,
rectangle, circle, ellipse, triangle, etc.--cut out of metal plates.

Each figure is cut out of a metal frame, so that there are two metal
plates for each figure: one, the frame, which shows the figure as an
opening; and one, the inset, which is the figure itself.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.--Sloping Boards to Display Set of Metal
Insets.]

[Illustration: FIG. 29.--Single Sandpaper Letter.]

The child places the frame upon a piece of paper and, with a colored
pencil, traces around the opening. He thus obtains an outline of the
geometric figure upon his paper.

He then takes the inset, places it exactly over the outline which he
has drawn, and traces around it with a colored pencil of a different
color.

In this way he learns to handle a pencil and to control his muscular
movements in drawing.

When the child has become skilled in this exercise with the geometric
forms, he may make more elaborate designs by placing the insets in
various positions and tracing around them with colored pencils.

These exercises give the child great pleasure, and, at the same time,
they are preparing his hand for the muscular movements which will be
necessary in writing.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.--Groups of Sandpaper Letters.]

The sandpaper letters are made by cutting letters of the alphabet out
of sandpaper and mounting them upon cards.

The vowels are mounted upon pink cards, and the consonants upon blue
cards.

The child learns the letters by touching them. The teacher takes the
child's index finger and traces with it the sandpaper letter, showing
the child the direction and the sequence of the movements which are
used in writing the letter.

At the same time she pronounces the sound of the letter.

The child thus learns the letter through three of his senses: through
sight, since he sees the letter; through touch, since he feels its
shape with his finger; and through hearing, since he hears its sound.

This triple sense impression makes the learning very rapid and very
secure.

Moreover, by tracing the letter with his finger, the child is preparing
his hand for the movements which he will later make with the pencil in
writing the letter.

When the child knows a number of letters, he begins to put them
together to form words.

For this purpose there is provided a large box of movable letters. The
letters are cut out of cardboard and are of the same size and shape as
the sandpaper letters.

The vowels are pink and the consonants are blue, as in the case of the
sandpaper letters.

[Illustration: FIG. 31.--Box of Movable Letters.]

The teacher pronounces a word slowly and distinctly, and the child
listens for the component sounds. He then hunts among the movable
letters for the letters representing these sounds, and places them
together in the proper order to form the word.

For example, the teacher says "_m-a-m-a_," pronouncing the word very
slowly and separating the sounds.

The child recognizes the sound "m" and finds the letter "m." He
recognizes the sound "a" and finds the letter "a." He places the
letters in the proper order and thus builds up the word "_mama_."

In this exercise the child is learning to think of words as made up of
separate sounds, and to recognize the letters which represent these
sounds.

This is really the beginning of writing, since writing is nothing more
than the representation of sounds by means of signs.

When the child has become fairly skilled in the building up of words
with the movable letters, it often happens that he suddenly discovers
that he can write.

He takes a pencil, and, to his great delight, finds that he can trace
upon paper the same letters which he has been building up with the
movable types.

This discovery of the power to write is generally a moment of intense
joy for the child.

Usually it is entirely unexpected, both by the child and by the
teacher. The child's hand has been prepared by the tracing exercises;
his mind knows the letters and knows how letters are combined into
words; and suddenly the two kinds of preparation unite, and the child
finds that he can write.

From this moment the development is very rapid. The child writes words,
then sentences, then stories.

His writing is not, of course, perfect from the beginning. But it
shows a steadily improvement, and, if the child has been properly
prepared, his writing soon becomes clear and well-formed.

The reading follows the writing, or rather develops parallel with it.

As soon as the child can form a word with the movable letters, he can
also read that word.

Reading, in its initial stages, is simply the reverse of the process
of word-building. In word-building the child listens to a word and
analyzes it into its component sounds. In reading he sees the written
word and synthesizes the component sounds into the word.

At first this synthesis is accomplished very slowly and with effort.
The child looks at a word, recognizes the separate letters, recalls
the sound of each letter, and pronounces these sounds in succession
until he recognizes the word which they form.

Gradually the process becomes more rapid, until, finally, the child
reads as easily and as fluently as an adult.

It is surprising how rapidly children learn to read and write by this
method. Children of four and five years often learn to read and write
in a few months, and their reading and writing is often more accurate
and more beautiful than that of children who have been taught by the
ordinary methods.

Moreover, the children take the greatest pleasure in these exercises.
To them, learning to read and write is not a tedious task imposed
upon them by the teacher; it is a delightful discovery which they make
for themselves.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FIG. 32.--The Musical Staff.]

THE READING OF MUSIC

After the children have learned to read words, they easily learn to
read music by a method which is analogous to that employed in teaching
the reading of words.

The didactic material for the teaching of musical reading consists of
a large staff drawn upon a blackboard, and a collection of large
wooden discs which may be placed upon the lines and in the spaces of
the staff.

Some of the discs are colored to represent the different values of
notes (whole notes, half notes, quarter notes, etc.), and some are
left plain to be used simply for position.

[Illustration: FIG. 33.--Didactic Material for Musical Reading.]

[Illustration: FIG. 34.--Didactic Material for Musical Reading.]

[Illustration: FIG. 35.--Didactic Material for Musical Reading.]

The child learns the positions of the notes upon the staff by placing
the discs upon the lines and spaces.

At the same time he learns the names of the notes by means of the
first series of bells described in the chapter on "Sensory Education."

When he can place the discs correctly upon the staff, and when he knows
the names of the notes, he begins to read simple melodies.

[Illustration: FIG. 36.--Didactic Material for Musical Reading.]

[Illustration: FIG. 37.--Didactic Material for Musical Reading.]

[Illustration: FIG. 38.--Didactic Material for Musical Reading.]

[Illustration: FIG. 39.--Dumb Keyboard.]

The process is exactly analogous to reading words. Just as in reading
words the child recognizes the written letters, recalls the sounds
which they represent, and pronounces these sounds in succession until
he recognizes the word, so in reading music the child recognizes the
written notes, recalls the tones which they represent, and produces
these tones in succession until he recognizes the melody.

With children who know how to read words, the process of learning to
read music is very rapid.

                  *       *       *       *       *

ARITHMETIC

The teaching of number is begun by means of exercises with concrete
materials, in which the child actually handles the quantities which
the numbers represent.

The first exercise consists in teaching the child to count from one to
ten by means of a series of rods.

These rods are similar to those used in the education of the visual
sense for length, but they are painted with red and blue sections to
show the units of which they are composed.

The first rod is painted entirely red, and represents one.

The second rod is painted with one red section and one blue section,
and represents two.

The third rod is painted with two red sections and one blue section
(red, blue, red), and represents three.

And so on up to the tenth rod, which has five red and five blue
sections, and represents ten.

[Illustration: FIG. 40.--Diagram Illustrating Use of Numerical Rods.]

The child learns to count by touching the sections on the rods and
counting, "one, two, three," etc.

He also learns to recognize the rods by their length, so that he can
tell at a glance which rod represents six, which represents eight, etc.

When the child has learned to count to ten, and to recognize the
quantities which the numbers from one to ten represent, he is taught
the figures.

The figures are made of sandpaper, like the sandpaper letters, and
they are learned in the same way.

The child traces the figure with his finger, following the same
movements which he will later make with his pencil, and at the same
time he hears the name of the figure.

As soon as the child knows a few figures, he begins to associate them
with the quantities which they represent.

For this purpose the teacher places one of the rods before the child,
and asks him to place beside it the figure which shows how many units
the rod contains.

In this way the child learns that the rod with three sections is
represented by the figure 3, that the rod with seven sections is
represented by the figure 7, etc.

The next step is to teach the formation of numbers above ten.

For this purpose there is provided a supply of golden beads, arranged
as follows:

Units: single beads.

Tens: bars, each containing ten beads.

Hundreds: squares, each containing ten bars (i.e., 100 beads).

Thousands: cubes, each containing ten squares (i.e., 1,000 beads).

By means of this material the child learns concretely the meaning of
units, tens, hundreds, and thousands.

He learns that ten units make one ten; that ten tens make one hundred;
that ten hundreds make one thousand.

Moreover, by handling the concrete materials, he learns to recognize
these quantities, so that he can tell at a glance the difference
between, let us say, 200 and 400, or between 1,000 and 3,000.

The decimal system thus becomes a concrete reality to the child
instead of a meaningless abstraction.

With this material the child learns to count beyond 1,000, and to form
any number up to 9,999.

For example, if the teacher asks the child to form the number 2,746,
the child takes two thousand-cubes, seven hundred-squares, four
ten-bars, and six unit-beads, and places them together.

He can then count the beads, if necessary, to verify the result, and
he sees clearly what the number 2,746 means.

When the child understands the formation of numbers, he begins to
learn the processes of arithmetic.

Addition is taught by placing quantities together. For example, if the
child is to add 2,546 and 1,321, he first forms the number 2,546 with
the golden beads, then forms the number 1,321, and then puts the two
quantities together and counts the result.

Subtraction is taught by taking away. To subtract 1,321 from 2,546,
the child forms the number 2,546, then takes away from it 1,321, and
counts what remains.

Multiplication is taught as repeated addition. To multiply 23 by 4, the
child forms the quantity 23 four times, puts the four quantities
together, and counts the result.

Division is taught by actual division of a quantity into equal parts.
To divide 84 by 4, the child forms the quantity 84, separates it into
four equal groups, and counts the number in each group.

All of the arithmetic is thus learned with concrete materials, and the
child sees clearly what each process means and why it gives the result
which it does.

Only after the child thoroughly understands the processes with
concrete materials does he learn to carry out the same processes with
figures on paper.

But when this step is taken, the transition is very easy, because the
child already understands what the processes mean.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.--Counting Boxes.]

[Illustration: FIG. 42.--Arithmetic Frame.]

The results obtained by this method of teaching arithmetic are very
remarkable. Children of five and six years often learn to add, subtract,
multiply, and divide numbers of four figures, and they do this work
with an understanding and an accuracy which is surprising.

Moreover, they take great pleasure in the work. To them arithmetic is
not a series of meaningless operations with figures; it is an
interesting game with concrete materials.

This pleasure in arithmetic often persists throughout the child's
school life. Children who have learned arithmetic by this method show
a continued interest in number work, and they usually excel in
mathematics in their later schooling.

                  *       *       *       *       *

MORAL FACTORS

There is one more aspect of education in the "Children's House" which
should not be overlooked, and that is the moral education of the
children.

This moral education is not given by means of sermons or moral
lessons. It comes about naturally as a result of the child's
experiences in the social life of the school.

When little children are placed together in a environment which has
been prepared for them, and when they are given freedom to develop
their own activities, they spontaneously develop many admirable moral
characteristics.

They learn to help one another, to be considerate of each other's
rights, to be generous and unselfish.

For example, if a little child is trying to carry a pitcher of water
and is in danger of spilling it, an older child will come to his aid
without being asked.

If a child has completed a piece of work and is pleased with it, he
will often show it to the other children, not boastfully, but with
the simple pleasure of sharing his joy.

If a child is ill, or sad, or in trouble, the other children show
sympathy and try to help him.

These characteristics are not taught; they develop naturally in an
environment where children are free and happy and engaged in
interesting work.

Moreover, the children learn to take care of their own possessions and
to respect the possessions of others.

They learn to keep the schoolroom neat and clean and to take care of
the materials which they use.

They learn to be punctual, to be responsible, to finish the work which
they begin.

All these moral lessons come to the children not as imposed duties,
but as natural consequences of their life in the school community.

The child who is free to choose his own work, and who finds joy and
satisfaction in his work, develops naturally those characteristics
which we call moral.

He becomes industrious, because he enjoys industry.

He becomes careful, because carelessness interferes with his success.

He becomes considerate of others, because he appreciates the
consideration which others show to him.

He becomes honest, because honesty is the natural attitude of a child
who has not been forced to be deceitful.

In short, the child develops a moral character not through moral
lessons, but through moral experiences.

And these experiences come to him naturally when he is placed in an
environment which encourages the development of his best
characteristics and which gives him the freedom to be his natural self.

It is in this way that the "Children's House" contributes not only to
the intellectual development of the child, but also to his moral and
social development.

The children who are educated by this method do not merely learn to
read and write and calculate; they learn to live.

They develop characters which are independent, responsible,
considerate, and happy.

And these character traits, which are developed in early childhood,
persist throughout life and contribute to the formation of good
citizens and valuable members of society.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DR. MONTESSORI'S OWN HANDBOOK ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated with electronic works, if you follow the terms
of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in
the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License
when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.